INTRODUCTION.

Tun objectos the present volume is to shew more
completely the precise points of difference between the
Chronicles of Wendover and Paris, by furuishing the
reader with the additions and various readings made by
the latter historian to the work of the former, and so v
rendering tho history more perfect, by combining the
labours of both writers sofar as they aro the narrators
of contemporaneous events. In doing this, it was the
original intention of the editor to include also a col-
lation of the Historia Minor3 but the perusal of the first
few peges of that work, appended to this Introduction,
will be sufficient, it is hoped, to shew that such an
attempt, however desirablo, was altogether impracti·
cable. The different style of language used in relating
the same events as are recorded in the Greater Chronicle,
the additional matter also with which it is supplied,
would have made it necessary to print volumes in order
to render such a collation at all perfect. It doeS, in-
deed, seem extraordinary that such a collation should
never have been made; still more so, perhaps, that the
work itself never should have been printed, being, as ·
it is, so entirely throughout the original work os Mat-
thew Paris, and existing, as attho present day, in the
original handwriting of its ingenious and learned com-
piler.¹ In former times, however, men appear to bavo
rested equally well satisfied with the Historia Major;

¹ In* the British Museum, MS. Reg. ll C. vu. ὁ

 

